keywords only exhibit the behaviors they're defined with (#1577)
json-schema-org/json-schema-spec: specs/jsonschema-core.md

agreement, schema authors SHALL NOT expect these additional keywords to be
supported by implementations that do not explicitly document such support.

Extension keywords MUST NOT interfere with the operation of keywords defined by
this document or the companion JSON Schema Validation specificiation, and SHOULD
NOT interfere with the operation of keywords defined by other extension

> documents.[^11]

Author: I would say that a new applicator introducing a new subschema in which a `properties` keyword could appear is neither interfering with nor directly modifying `unevaluatedProperties`.  `unevaluatedProperties` is defined to consider subschemas of all applicators, not just specific ones.

Do you have another example?

"Directly modify" does also convey the purpose of this text, and it's language we've used before.

Implementations MUST refuse to evaluate schemas which contain keywords which
they do not know how to process or explicitly choose not to process.

## Keyword Behaviors {#keyword-behaviors}

JSON Schema keywords may exhibit one or more behaviors. This specification

> defines three such behaviors:

Reviewer: This seems to say that all keyword behaviors in the specification are in these three categories, but the spec defines other behaviors for e.g. `$id` and `$anchor`/`$dynamicAnchor`. And `$schema` ... exists.

Author: That is an interesting point.  I was thinking that these keywords don't exhibit a _behavior_ so much as they are merely informative, like `maxContains` would be to `contains`.

Reviewer 2: This is a great point! My implementation doesn't even treat those as keywords. They're meta-data used to process the schema, but they're not directly part of the validation/annotation process. So, I wouldn't consider them similar to `maxContains` that is involved in validation.

I'm not sure what I'd suggest, but I think something needs to be called that these aren't normal keywords.

Implementations MUST refuse to evaluate schemas which contain keywords which
they do not know how to process or explicitly choose not to process.

## Keyword Behaviors {#keyword-behaviors}

JSON Schema keywords may exhibit one or more behaviors. This specification
defines three such behaviors[^7]:

- Assertions validate that an instance satisfies constraints, producing a
  boolean result: `true` if the constraints are satisfied; `false` otherwise.

> - Annotations attach information that applications may use in any way they see
>   fit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Annotations attach information to instance locations that applications may use in any way they see
  fit.
```

- Applicators apply subschemas to parts of the instance and combine their
  results.

[^7]: This specification also defines several operational directive keywords,
such as `$id` and `$schema`. As such, these keywords do not exhibit these
behaviors. However, it is recommended that extensions avoid defining additional
directive keywords as they could interfere with schema processing and produce

> unexpected or undesirable results.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what you mean by "interfering with schema processing".

The way I see it, people should avoid creating these kinds of keywords because it's unlikely that an implementation will be able to support them using typical extension mechanisms. At least my implementation wouldn't.

Author: I've removed this sentence and expanded on the idea of a 'directive' keyword to explain why they're different.

Extension keywords SHOULD be defined using these behaviors, keeping in mind that
annotations in particular are extremely flexible. Complex behavior is usually
better delegated to applications on the basis of annotation data than
implemented directly as schema keywords. However, extension keywords MAY define
other behaviors for specialized purposes.

Keywords which are not defined to exhibit a particular behavior MUST NOT affect
that aspect of evaluation. For example, a keyword which does not act as an

> assertion MUST NOT affect the validation result.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this means. It sounds like it's saying that if you say it doesn't have an assertion behavior, then it shouldn't have an assertion behavior. Is there some nuance that I'm missing?

Author: Nope, that's pretty much it.  I thought it would be good to be clear that a keyword that doesn't define a behavior shouldn't be made to exhibit that behavior.  If we don't state that, someone's gonna do it.  Maybe it can be reworded.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it needs to be reworded, but it's still not making sense to me. A keyword is defined in a specification. Whatever the specification says it does is what it does. I don't see how the spec can define a keyword to do something, but it does another. Unless this is a note implementers of that specification telling them they shouldn't add behaviors that aren't in the specification. But, again, that doesn't seem like it's something the spec needs to say. It seems self evident that if you implement a spec, it should do what the spec says. That's just the concept of implementing a spec.

Is it that you don't want people to write in their spec that their keyword is not an assertion but then define assertion behavior? That just means the spec isn't self consistent. That also doesn't seem like it needs to be said. We shouldn't have to say that a keyword spec shouldn't contradict itself.

Reviewer 2: Ok, so it was this one,

> Unless this is a note implementers of that specification telling them they shouldn't add behaviors that aren't in the specification.

I don't really think that needs to be said, but I'm ok with it as long as it can be reworded to make it more clear that that's what it means.

they do not know how to process or explicitly choose not to process.

## Keyword Behaviors {#keyword-behaviors}

JSON Schema keywords may exhibit one or more behaviors. This specification
defines three such behaviors[^7]:

- Assertions validate that an instance satisfies constraints, producing a
  boolean result: `true` if the constraints are satisfied; `false` otherwise.
- Annotations attach information to instance locations that applications may use
  in any way they see fit.
- Applicators apply subschemas to parts of the instance and combine their
  results.

[^7]: This specification also defines several operational directive keywords,
such as `$id` and `$schema`, which do not exhibit these behaviors. Instead,
these keywords provide metadata that instruct implementations on how to
interpret and process the schema.

Extension keywords SHOULD be defined using these behaviors, keeping in mind that
annotations in particular are extremely flexible. Complex behavior is usually
better delegated to applications on the basis of annotation data than
implemented directly as schema keywords. However, extension keywords MAY define
other behaviors for specialized purposes.

> Implementations SHOULD NOT add unspecified behaviors to keywords.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what this is aiming to prevent.

Behaviors outside the three above? I'm not sure what that would be. That also seems more the concern of the definition of an extension keyword rather than an implementation.

Or behaviors within the three, but that aren't in a specification? If so, that seems just the nature of a specification, that an implementation of it sticks to its specified behaviors.

Reviewer 2: See, [this](https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/pull/1577#discussion_r2040716835) thread.

Author: See [this discussion](https://github.com/json-schema-org/json-schema-spec/pull/1577#discussion_r2040716835).

elsewhere in the same schema document, or in a different one. The mechanism for
identifying such referenced schemas is defined by the keyword.

Applicator keywords also behave as assertions by defining how subschema or
referenced schema boolean [assertion](#assertions) results are modified and/or
combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply
any boolean logic operation to the assertion results of subschemas, but MUST NOT

> introduce new assertion conditions of their own.

Reviewer 2: > but MUST NOT introduce new assertion conditions of their own.

I'm not following this. What is this trying to say? What are we protecting against be forbidding it?

Author: That text was already there.

It's just saying that applicator assertions can only be combinatorial on their subschemas.  For instance `anyOf` only ORs the results of its subschemas without asserting anything else.

I think this is a simplicity guard, kind of a JSON Schema version of SRP.  I suppose this means something like `requiredProperties` would be in violation of the spec since it's combining subschema results _and_ asserting that all of the properties are there.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's unnecessary for that to be a constraint. Your `requiredProperties` example is great. Although I'm not a fan of that keyword, I don't think there should be any spec reason why it shouldn't be allowed.

> or maybe even an informative note suggesting simplicity over complexity?

Yes. I think that's a great idea.

Author: I've added a footnote and changes this to SHOULD NOT.

elsewhere in the same schema document, or in a different one. The mechanism for
identifying such referenced schemas is defined by the keyword.

> Applicator keywords also behave as assertions by defining how subschema or
> referenced schema boolean [assertion](#assertions) results are modified and/or
> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Reviewer: 'referenced' seems okay to me; $ref has a referenced schema that isn't a subschema - although maybe that is better mentioned above in the initial description of applicator keyword behavior.

The 'boolean' refers to an assertion result, not type of subschema, though the words/phrases run together a bit and it's difficult to parse how they are grouped (even knowing all the terms, much less while learning them).

```suggestion
Applicator keywords also behave as assertions, using the assertion results of
each subschema or referenced schema of the keyword. These boolean results are
modified (e.g. the `not` keyword negates its subschema's assertion) and/or
combined (e.g. `allOf` takes the conjunction of its subschemas' assertions)
to produce the boolean result of the applicator.
```

Not quite polished - not suggesting that be put in as is, just thinking through what I might find to read better. (The spec is always very light on examples, I assume intentionally so maybe those don't go in, but I do always find they make the more generalized spec language much easier to connect to what it is describing).

> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Reviewer 2: > 'referenced' seems okay to me; $ref has a referenced schema that isn't a subschema

`$ref` is just a keyword in a subschema. It's sufficient to call `{ "$ref": "..." }` a subschema. It's not something different because it happens to contain a reference.

(I wouldn't say the same thing before 2019-09. Back then I would call it something different than a schema.)

> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Reviewer: sure, a schema containing a $ref isn't different than any other, but taking $ref as an applicator keyword, the schema it is doing application of is its referenced schema, not a subschema (I think I recall that your implementation does make it a subschema, but in the original document it isn't)

> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Reviewer 2: Oh, I see what you mean. `$ref` is an applicator but its value isn't a subschema, it's a reference. Good point!

> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Author: I do agree that "boolean" is redundant and "modified" is misleading at best.  You _could_ say that `not` "modifies" its subschema's result, but does it really?  I'd say it has its own result which is the inverse of its subschema.

I'll massage this a bit.

> combined to produce the boolean result of the applicator. Applicators may apply

Author: Actually, @notEthan, I like what you have.  The examples do make both cases clear, even the "boolean" inclusion makes more sense.

elsewhere in the same schema document, or in a different one. The mechanism for
identifying such referenced schemas is defined by the keyword.

Applicator keywords also behave as assertions, using the assertion results of
each subschema or referenced schema of the keyword. These boolean results are
modified (e.g. the `not` keyword negates its subschema's assertion) and/or
combined (e.g. `allOf` takes the conjunction of its subschemas' assertions)
to produce the boolean result of the applicator.
any boolean logic operation to the assertion results of subschemas, but SHOULD

> NOT introduce new assertion conditions of their own.[^2]

Reviewer 2: Looks like something broke in the last edit. There's a floating sentence fragment at the end.

(Otherwise I like the new wording.)

Author: Ah, yeah, that was pulling in a suggestion from @notEthan.  The start of the next sentence was omitted.

[^2]: It is recommended that keywords have a single resposibility. An example of
this in action is the separation between `properties`, which verifies object
property values have the right data _if_ they exist, and `required`, which
verifies that object properties exist. Separating these concerns allows for more

> reusable components.

Reviewer 3: More a broader comment that comes to mind with this change...

I know we have at times talked about the posibility of adding "shortcut" keywords, such as combining `properties` and `required`. I forget if this is something we explicitly decided we would or would not do. (I would be happy stating we will not do such, but I wanted to see what those with a better memory remember also!)
